AP Annual Luncheon
              Washington, DC
              April 14, 2008
Editor’s note: The week before this speech, Obama was 
                caught in an uncharacteristic moment of loose language. Referring 
                to working-class voters in old industrial towns impacted by job 
                losses, the presidential hopeful said: "They get bitter, 
                they cling to guns or religion or antipathy to people who aren't 
                like them or anti-immigrant sentiment or anti-trade sentiment, 
                as a way to explain their frustrations."
Good 
              afternoon. I know I kept a lot of you guys busy this weekend with 
              the comments I made last week. Some of you might even be a little 
              bitter about that. 
As 
              I said yesterday, I regret some of the words I chose, partly because 
              the way that these remarks have been interpreted have offended some 
              people and partly because they have served as one more distraction 
              from the critical debate that we must have in this election season.
I'm 
              a person of deep faith, and my religion has sustained me through 
              a lot in my life. I even gave a speech on faith before I ever started 
              running for President where I said that Democrats, "make a 
              mistake when we fail to acknowledge the power of faith in people's 
              lives." I also represent a state with a large number of hunters 
              and sportsmen, and I understand how important these traditions are 
              to families in Illinois and all across America. And, contrary to 
              what my poor word choices may have implied or my opponents have 
              suggested, I've never believed that these traditions or people's 
              faith has anything to do with how much money they have.
But 
              I will never walk away from the larger point that I was trying to 
              make. For the last several decades, people in small towns and cities 
              and rural areas all across this country have seen globalization 
              change the rules of the game on them. When I began my career as 
              an organizer on the South Side of Chicago, I saw what happens when 
              the local steel mill shuts its doors and moves overseas. You don't 
              just lose the jobs in the mill, you start losing jobs and businesses 
              throughout the community. The streets are emptier. The schools suffer.
I saw 
              it during my campaign for the Senate in Illinois when I'd talk to 
              union guys who had worked at the local Maytag plant for twenty, 
              thirty years before being laid off at fifty-five years old when 
              it picked up and moved to Mexico; and they had no idea what they're 
              going to do without the paycheck or the pension that they counted 
              on. One man didn't even know if he'd be able to afford the liver 
              transplant his son needed now that his health care was gone. 
I've 
              heard these stories almost every day during this campaign, whether 
              it was in Iowa or Ohio or Pennsylvania. And the people I've met 
              have also told me that every year, in every election, politicians 
              come to their towns, and they tell them what they want to hear, 
              and they make big promises, and then they go back to Washington 
              when the campaign's over, and nothing changes. There's no plan to 
              address the downside of globalization. We don't do anything about 
              the skyrocketing cost of health care or college or those disappearing 
              pensions. Instead of fighting to replace jobs that aren't coming 
              back, Washington ends up fighting over the latest distraction of 
              the week.
And 
              after years and years and years of this, a lot of people in this 
              country have become cynical about what government can do to improve 
              their lives. They are angry and frustrated with their leaders for 
              not listening to them; for not fighting for them; for not always 
              telling them the truth. And yes, they are bitter about that. 
Now, 
              Senator McCain and the Republicans in Washington are already looking 
              ahead to the fall and have decided that they plan on using these 
              comments to argue that I'm out of touch with what's going on in 
              the lives of working Americans. I don't blame them for this -- that's 
              the nature of our political culture, and if I had to carry the banner 
              for eight years of George Bush's failures, I'd be looking for something 
              else to talk about too. 
But 
              I will say this. If John McCain wants to turn this election into 
              a contest about which party is out of touch with the struggles and 
              the hopes of working America, that's a debate I'm happy to have. 
              In fact, I think that's a debate we need to have. Because I believe 
              that the real insult to the millions of hard-working Americans out 
              there would be a continuation of the economic agenda that has dominated 
              Washington for far too long.
I may 
              have made a mistake last week in the words that I chose, but the 
              other party has made a much more damaging mistake in the failed 
              policies they've chosen and the bankrupt philosophy they've embraced 
              for the last three decades. 
It's 
              a philosophy that says there's no role for government in making 
              the global economy work for working Americas; that we have to just 
              sit back watch those factories close and those jobs disappear; that 
              there's nothing we can do or should do about workers without health 
              care, or children in crumbling schools, or families who are losing 
              their homes, and so we should just hand out a few tax breaks and 
              wish everyone the best of luck.
Ronald 
              Reagan called this trickle-down economics. George Bush called it 
              the Ownership Society. But what it really means is that you're on 
              your own. If your premiums or your tuition is rising faster than 
              you can afford, you're on your own. If you're that Maytag worker 
              who just lost his pension, tough luck. If you're a child born into 
              poverty, you'll just have to pull yourself up by your own bootstraps. 
              
This 
              philosophy isn't just out-of-touch - it's put our economy out-of-whack. 
              Years of pain on Main Street have finally trickled up to Wall Street 
              and sent us hurtling toward recession, reminding us that we're all 
              connected - that we can't prosper as a nation where a few people 
              are doing well and everyone else is struggling. 
John 
              McCain is an American hero and a worthy opponent, but he's proven 
              time and time again that he just doesn't understand this. It took 
              him three tries in seven days just to figure out that the home foreclosure 
              crisis was an actual problem. He's had a front row seat to the last 
              eight years of disastrous policies that have widened the income 
              gap and saddled our children with debt, and now he's promising four 
              more years of the very same thing. 
He's 
              promising to make permanent the Bush tax breaks for the wealthiest 
              few who didn't need them and didn't ask for them - tax breaks that 
              are so irresponsible that John McCain himself once said they offended 
              his conscience. 
He's 
              promising four more years of trade deals that don't have a single 
              safeguard for American workers - that don't help American workers 
              compete and win in a global economy. 
He's 
              promising four more years of an Administration that will push for 
              the privatization of Social Security - a plan that would gamble 
              away people's retirement on the stock market; a plan that was already 
              rejected by Democrats and Republicans under George Bush. 
He's 
              promising four more years of policies that won't guarantee health 
              insurance for working Americans; that won't bring down the rising 
              cost of college tuition; that won't do a thing for the Americans 
              who are living in those communities where the jobs have left and 
              the factories have shut their doors. 
And 
              yet, despite all this, the other side is still betting that the 
              American people won't notice that John McCain is running for George 
              Bush's third term. They think that they'll forget about all that's 
              happened in the last eight years; that they'll be tricked into believing 
              that it's either me or our party is the one that's out of touch 
              with what's going on in their lives. 
Well 
              I'm making a different bet. I'm betting on the American people. 
              
The 
              men and women I've met in small towns and big cities across this 
              country see this election as a defining moment in our history. They 
              understand what's at stake here because they're living it every 
              day. And they are tired of being distracted by fake controversies. 
              They are fed up with politicians trying to divide us for their own 
              political gain. And I believe they'll see through the tactics that 
              are used every year, in every election, to appeal to our fears, 
              or our biases, or our differences - because they've never wanted 
              or needed change as badly as they do now. 
The 
              people I've met during this campaign know that government cannot 
              solve all of our problems, and they don't expect it to. They don't 
              want our tax dollars wasted on programs that don't work or perks 
              for special interests who don't work for us. They understand that 
              we cannot stop every job from going overseas or build a wall around 
              our economy, and they know that we shouldn't.
But 
              they believe it's finally time that we make health care affordable 
              and available for every single American; that we bring down costs 
              for workers and for businesses; that we cut premiums, and stop insurance 
              companies from denying people care or coverage who need it most. 
              
They 
              believe it's time we provided real relief to the victims of this 
              housing crisis; that we help families refinance their mortgage so 
              they can stay in their homes; that we start giving tax relief to 
              the people who actually need it - middle-class families, and seniors, 
              and struggling homeowners.
They 
              believe that we can and should make the global economy work for 
              working Americans; that we might not be able to stop every job from 
              going overseas, but we certainly can stop giving tax breaks to companies 
              who send them their and start giving tax breaks to companies who 
              create good jobs right here in America. We can invest in the types 
              of renewable energy that won't just reduce our dependence on oil 
              and save our planet, but create up to five million new jobs that 
              can't be outsourced. 
They 
              believe we can train our workers for those new jobs, and keep the 
              most productive workforce the most competitive workforce in the 
              world if we fix our public education system by investing in what 
              works and finding out what doesn't; if we invest in early childhood 
              education and finally make college affordable for everyone who wants 
              to go; if we stop talking about how great our teachers are and start 
              rewarding them for their greatness. 
They 
              believe that if you work your entire life, you deserve to retire 
              with dignity and respect, which means a pension you can count on, 
              and Social Security that's always there. 
This 
              is what the people I've met believe about the country they love. 
              It doesn't matter if they're Democrats or Republicans; whether they're 
              from the smallest towns or the biggest cities; whether they hunt 
              or they don't; whether they go to church, or temple, or mosque, 
              or not. We may come from different places and have different stories, 
              but we share common hopes, and one very American dream. 
That 
              is the dream I am running to help restore in this election. If I 
              get the chance, that is what I'll be talking about from now until 
              November. That is the choice that I'll offer the American people 
              - four more years of what we had for the last eight, or fundamental 
              change in Washington.
People 
              may be bitter about their leaders and the state of our politics, 
              but beneath that, they are hopeful about what's possible in America. 
              That's why they leave their homes on their day off, or their jobs 
              after a long day of work, and travel - sometimes for miles, sometimes 
              in the bitter cold - to attend a rally or a town hall meeting held 
              by Senator Clinton, or Senator McCain, or myself. Because they believe 
              that we can change things. Because they believe in that dream. 
I know 
              something about that dream. I wasn't born into a lot of money. I 
              was raised by a single mother with the help my grandparents, who 
              grew up in small-town Kansas, went to school on the GI Bill, and 
              bought their home through an FHA loan. My mother had to use food 
              stamps at one point, but she still made sure that through scholarships, 
              I got a chance to go to some of the best schools around, which helped 
              me get into some of the best colleges around, which gave me loans 
              that Michelle and I just finished paying not all that many years 
              ago.
In 
              other words, my story is a quintessentially American story. It's 
              the same story that has made this country a beacon for the world-a 
              story of struggle and sacrifice on the part of my forebearers and 
              a story overcoming great odds. I carry that story with me each and 
              every day, It's why I wake up every day and do this, and it's why 
              I continue to hold such hope for the future of a country where the 
              dreams of its people have always been possible. Thank you. 
                 
