Pennsylvania Primary Night
              Evansville, Indiana
              April 22, 2008

I want 
              to start by congratulating Senator Clinton on her victory tonight, 
              and I want to thank the hundreds of thousands of Pennsylvanians 
              who stood with our campaign today.
There 
              were a lot of folks who didn't think we could make this a close 
              race when it started. But we worked hard, and we traveled across 
              the state to big cities and small towns, to factory floors and VFW 
              halls. And now, six weeks later, we closed the gap. We rallied people 
              of every age and race and background to our cause. And whether they 
              were inspired for the first time or for the first time in a long 
              time, we registered a record number of voters who will lead our 
              party to victory in November.
These 
              Americans cast their ballot for the same reason you came here tonight; 
              for the same reason that millions of Americans have gone door-to-door 
              and given whatever small amount they can to this campaign; for the 
              same reason that we began this journey just a few hundred miles 
              from here on a cold February morning in Springfield - because we 
              believe that the challenges we face are bigger than the smallness 
              of our politics, and we know that this election is our chance to 
              change it.
After 
              fourteen long months, it's easy to forget this from time to time 
              - to lose sight of the fierce urgency of this moment. It's easy 
              to get caught up in the distractions and the silliness and the tit-for-tat 
              that consumes our politics; the bickering that none of us are immune 
              to, and that trivializes the profound issues - two wars, an economy 
              in recession, a planet in peril.
But 
              that kind of politics is not why we're here. It's not why I'm here 
              and it's not why you're here.
We're 
              here because of the more than one hundred workers in Logansport, 
              Indiana who just found out that their company has decided to move 
              its entire factory to Taiwan.
We're 
              here because of the young man I met in Youngsville, North Carolina 
              who almost lost his home because he has three children with cystic 
              fibrosis and couldn't pay their medical bills; who still doesn't 
              have health insurance for himself or his wife and lives in fear 
              that a single illness could cost them everything.
We're 
              here because there are families all across this country who are 
              sitting around the kitchen table right now trying to figure out 
              how to pay their insurance premiums, and their kids' tuition, and 
              still make the mortgage so they're not the next ones in the neighborhood 
              to put a For Sale sign in the front yard; who will lay awake tonight 
              wondering if next week's paycheck will cover next month's bills.
We're 
              not here to talk about change for change's sake, but because our 
              families, our communities, and our country desperately need it. 
              We're here because we can't afford to keep doing what we've been 
              doing for another four years. We can't afford to play the same Washington 
              games with the same Washington players and expect a different result. 
              Not this time. Not now.
We 
              already know what we're getting from the other party's nominee. 
              John McCain has offered this country a lifetime of service, and 
              we respect that, but what he's not offering is any meaningful change 
              from the policies of George W. Bush.
John 
              McCain believes that George Bush's Iraq policy is a success, so 
              he's offering four more years of a war with no exit strategy; a 
              war that's sending our troops on their third tour, and fourth tour, 
              and fifth tour of duty; a war that's costing us billions of dollars 
              a month and hasn't made us any safer.
John 
              McCain said that George Bush's economic policies have led to "great 
              progress" over the last seven years, and so he's promising 
              four more years of tax cuts for CEOs and corporations who didn't 
              need them and weren't asking for them; tax cuts that he once voted 
              against because he said they "offended his conscience."
Well 
              they may have stopped offending John McCain's conscience somewhere 
              along the road to the White House, but George Bush's economic policies 
              still offend ours. Because I don't think that the 232,000 Americans 
              who've lost their jobs this year are seeing the great progress that 
              John McCain has seen. I don't think the millions of Americans losing 
              their homes have seen that progress. I don't think the families 
              without health care and the workers without pensions have seen that 
              progress. And if we continue down the same reckless path, I don't 
              think that future generations who'll be saddled with debt will see 
              these as years of progress.
We 
              already know that John McCain offers more of the same. The question 
              is not whether the other party will bring about change in Washington 
              - the question is, will we?
Because 
              the truth is, the challenges we face are not just the fault of one 
              man or one party. How many years - how many decades - have we been 
              talking about solving our health care crisis? How many Presidents 
              have promised to end our dependence on foreign oil? How many jobs 
              have gone overseas in the 70s, and the 80s, and the 90s? And we 
              still haven't done anything about it. And we know why.
In 
              every election, politicians come to your cities and your towns, 
              and they tell you what you want to hear, and they make big promises, 
              and they lay out all these plans and policies. But then they go 
              back to Washington when the campaign's over. Lobbyists spend millions 
              of dollars to get their way. The status quo sets in. And instead 
              of fighting for health care or jobs, Washington ends up fighting 
              over the latest distraction of the week. It happens year after year 
              after year.
Well 
              this is your chance to say "Not this year." This is your 
              chance to say "Not this time." We have a choice in this 
              election.
We 
              can be a party that says there's no problem with taking money from 
              Washington lobbyists - from oil lobbyists and drug lobbyists and 
              insurance lobbyists. We can pretend that they represent real Americans 
              and look the other way when they use their money and influence to 
              stop us from reforming health care or investing in renewable energy 
              for yet another four years.
Or 
              this time, we can recognize that you can't be the champion of working 
              Americans if you're funded by the lobbyists who drown out their 
              voices. We can do what we've done in this campaign, and say that 
              we won't take a dime of their money. We can do what I did in Illinois, 
              and in Washington, and bring both parties together to rein in their 
              power so we can take our government back. It's our choice.
We 
              can be a party that thinks the only way to look tough on national 
              security is to talk, and act, and vote like George Bush and John 
              McCain. We can use fear as a tactic, and the threat of terrorism 
              to scare up votes.
Or 
              we can decide that real strength is asking the tough questions before 
              we send our troops to fight. We can see the threats we face for 
              what they are - a call to rally all Americans and all the world 
              against the common challenges of the 21st century - terrorism and 
              nuclear weapons; climate change and poverty; genocide and disease. 
              That's what it takes to keep us safe in the world. That's the real 
              legacy of Roosevelt and Kennedy and Truman.
We 
              can be a party that says and does whatever it takes to win the next 
              election. We can calculate and poll-test our positions and tell 
              everyone exactly what they want to hear.
Or 
              we can be the party that doesn't just focus on how to win but why 
              we should. We can tell everyone what they need to hear about the 
              challenges we face. We can seek to regain not just an office, but 
              the trust of the American people that their leaders in Washington 
              will tell them the truth. That's the choice in this election.
We 
              can be a party of those who only think like we do and only agree 
              with all our positions. We can continue to slice and dice this country 
              into Red States and Blue States. We can exploit the divisions that 
              exist in our country for pure political gain.
Or 
              this time, we can build on the movement we've started in this campaign 
              - a movement that's united Democrats, Independents, and Republicans; 
              a movement of young and old, rich and poor; white, black, Hispanic, 
              Asian, and Native American. Because one thing I know from traveling 
              to forty-six states this campaign season is that we're not as divided 
              as our politics suggests. We may have different stories and different 
              backgrounds, but we hold common hopes for the future of this country.
In 
              the end, this election is still our best chance to solve the problems 
              we've been talking about for decades - as one nation; as one people. 
              Fourteen months later, that is still what this election is about.
Millions 
              of Americans who believe we can do better - that we must do better 
              - have put us in a position to bring about real change. Now it's 
              up to you, Indiana. You can decide whether we're going to travel 
              the same worn path, or whether we chart a new course that offers 
              real hope for the future.
During 
              the course of this campaign, we've all learned what my wife reminds 
              me of all the time - that I am not a perfect man. And I will not 
              be a perfect President. And so while I will always listen to you, 
              and be honest with you, and fight for you every single day for the 
              next for years, I will also ask you to be a part of the change that 
              we need. Because in my two decades of public service to this country, 
              I have seen time and time again that real change doesn't begin in 
              the halls of Washington, but on the streets of America. It doesn't 
              happen from the top-down, it happens from the bottom-up.
I also 
              know that real change has never been easy, and it won't be easy 
              this time either. The status quo in Washington will fight harder 
              than they ever have to divide us and distract us with ads and attacks 
              from now until November.
But 
              don't ever forget that you have the power to change this country.
You 
              can make this election about how we're going to help those workers 
              in Logansport; how we're going to re-train them, and educate them, 
              and make our workforce competitive in a global economy.
You 
              can make this election about how we're going to make health care 
              affordable for that family in North Carolina; how we're going to 
              help those families sitting around the kitchen table tonight pay 
              their bills and stay in their homes.
You 
              can make this election about how we plan to leave our children and 
              all children a planet that's safer and a world that still sees America 
              the same way my father saw it from across the ocean - as a beacon 
              of all that is good and all that is possible for all mankind.
It 
              is now our turn to follow in the footsteps of all those generations 
              who sacrificed and struggled and faced down the greatest odds to 
              perfect our improbable union. And if we're willing to do what they 
              did; if we're willing to shed our cynicism and our doubts and our 
              fears; if we're willing to believe in what's possible again; then 
              I believe that we won't just win this primary election, we won't 
              just win this election in November, we will change this country, 
              and keep this country's promise alive in the twenty-first century. 
              Thank you, and may God Bless the United States of America. 
  
                 
